
THE DEED
HUNTER
THE DEED
HUNTER
HOW A BRAZILIAN IMMIGRANT BECAME A
MILLIONAIRIEN 4 YEARS
BY BUYING PROPERTIES FROM THE GOVERNMENT FOR 50 BUCKS
The Deed Hunter
How a Brazilian Immigrant Became a Millionaire in 4 Years
by Buing Properties from the Government for 50 Bucks
Marcos Jacober
Book Design
Colchere Solu~6es Edicoriais
COPYRIGHT© 2016 MARCOS JACO BER
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. NO PART OF THIS WORK MAY
BE REPRODUCED OR STORED IN AN INFORMATIONAL
RETRIEVAL SYSTEM, WITHOUT THE EXPRESS
PERMISSION OF THE PUBLISHER IN WRITING.
ISBN: 978-1547248018
PUBLISHED BY:
DEED HUNTER WORLD™
This book is dedicated to ALL HATERS, ALL
THE DOUBTERS, ALL NONBELIEVERS,
AND ESPECIALLY TO YOU, WHO WILL
ALSO PROVE THEM WRONG.
Acknowledgments
The completion of this book and my success story could not
have been possible without the participation and assistance of so
many people whose names may not all be enumerated, otherwise
this acknowledgment session would have more pages than the
actual book.
However, the group would like to express their deep appreciation,
particularly to the following:
I would like to begin by thanking my mom for the work ethic she
instilled in me as a child. Although at the time I could not see the
future personal benefit of making my bed, preparing my own meal,
and even washing my clothes (I thought my mom didn't love me
enough), I did learn a few important life lessons, such as to tackle
every job as if you are the owner, and that opportunity is created
through hard work. These life lessons have carried me through my
career and serve as reminders that anything can be accomplished
if one is determined.
Also, I would like to recognize my wife of 10 years, Ludy. She
gave me two wonderful children, Nicholas and Valentina. They
are always my biggest why.
I want to thank Sandra Reynaldo for all her contributions to my
life. I still remember her explaining to me how email works back
in the days in Brazil, and also for her contribution to creating the
American Tax Lien Association. I couldn't have it done without
her. (She deserves all the credits and none of the blame!)
Thanks to Sam Foreman (my FedEx Manager) for persecuting
me until the point where I had my contract terminated, and for
making me lose a business that I cherished for 14 years. Because of
that, I was able to focus 110%on my Tax Liens/Tax Deed Business,
which made me a millionaire and a free man. Because of him, I have
more time for my family, I can do what I love, and I can travel the
world inspiring and teaching people how to do the same. Without
his relentless effort in taking me out of business, I wouldn't have
had the time or the opportunity to write this book.
And, last but not least, to my dear friend Suenon Guimaraes,
who introduced me to the world of Tax Liens and Tax Deeds by
gifting me a book.
PS: Cara Witvoet, my book architect, I blame you. Writing this
book has been an exercise of sustained suffering. You the reader
may, perhaps, exempt yourself from excessive guilt, but for you who
played a larger role in prolonging my agonies with your encouragement
and support, thank you.
Contents
CHAPTER 1: The Birth of The Deed Hunter 11
CHAPTER 2: The Basics - First Things First 23
CHAPTER 3: Tax Lien Certificates 29
CHAPTER4: Tax Deeds 43
CHAPTERS: Property Research 55
CHAPTER6: Operating Through a Business 59
CHAPTER 7: Qualified Retirement Plan 69
CHAPTER 8: Investor Mindset 77
CHAPTER 9: What to Expectin Each State 83
About the Author 101
CHAPTE1R:
TheB irtho fT he
DeedH unter
I wasn't born in the U.S. but I came here as fast as I could.
Ever since I was a child growing up in a poor area of Sao Paulo,
Brazil, I have always felt a special connection with the United States.
I was only 9years old, and I can still remember the 19840lympic
Games, held in Los Angeles. Every gold medal celebration with the
performance of the U.S. National Anthem, it was an opportunity
for me to feel emotional.
I couldn't explain why I was so drawn towards the U.S., and
I couldn't imagine that one day I would actually move here and
become an American Citizen. But I could tell that something
special was going on between me and this country.
At the age of 15, I started working at McDonald's, and my dream
then was to go to Hamburger University. Every time I watched a
training video on how to prepare, serve, and work at McDonald's,
I couldn't help but close my eyes and imagine what it would be
like to live in the U.S.
I think it is funny and also sad how Americans take this country
for granted. Fast-forwarding this long story, 13 years ago, I had the
opportunity to come to the U.S.
The Deed Hunter
My aunt Dora moved to the U.S. when I was 12. I wasn't close to
her and, back in those days, we lived in a world before the internet
and smartphones.
Communication was very slow and difficult. Since we were a
very poor family, we didn't have the luxury of owning a landline,
so we used to communicate through the mail.
One day, after many years living abroad, aunt Dora decided to
revisit Brazil and made a proposition to my mother. She asked if
my mom would like to come to live in the U.S. I didn't know back
then, but that was the opportunity I had been waiting for my whole
life and, about two years later, I finally arrived in the U.S.
That was my opportunity, my shot at the ''American Dream".
I arrived in New York on June 28th, 1998, with only USD
$100.00. My mom was the one who bought my flight tickets
with my promise that I would pay her back with interest. I know
that's very strange coming from a mother, but not if you knew
my mother.
She was really straight and always made sure that I didn't take
anything for granted, and always tried to make sure I understood
that everything in life comes with a price. I'm everything that I
am today because of the lessons my mom taught me, and I will
be forever grateful.
My mother had a friend who worked in construction, so she
managed to get me a job working with him. I didn't know a word
of English, and my job was basically to carry two-by-fours and
construction materials to the guys who knew how to do the work.
I remember receiving my very first paycheck of 150 bucks.
I had a number in my mind and a goal to make $800 a week. I
used to say to myself, "Man, the day I make $800 I won't know
what to do with that amount of money".
Since I had that goal, I made myself know that I would not rest
until I had achieved it.
After reminding myself every morning in front of the mirror
about my goal of making USD $800,00, I was always looking for
a job that would pay me better.
Chapte1r : TheB irtho f TheD eedH unter
With integrity like Scarface, and although I was currently working
and employed, I was constantly searching and looking for a new
opportunity and a job that would pay me more.
After working in construction for two weeks and almost dying
from heat exhaustion and sunburn, I landed a job at a Portuguese
supermarket. To me, that was a step-up on the ladder towards my
goal of making $800 a week.
At my new job, I had to work 11 hours a day, 6 days a week,
including weekends, for $250 a week. It wasn't the best paycheck,
especially if you divide that amount by the number of hours I
worked per week, but to me, that was a better position because I was
working inside, making $100 more per week, and I had free food.
Yes, another step-up, many more to come!
Since early on, I have always been an entrepreneur and I used to
think 24/7 about how to make more money.
I thought about selling water and soda at traffic lights, I thought
about selling goods door to door, I had many ideas, and all of them
had a reference to my childhood in Brazil. However, many of them
were also considered unlawful in the U.S.
I started to look for a job as a driver, but I didn't have a valid
driver's license. The only state that was issuing a driver's license to
immigrants was Florida, so I saved up some money and went there
to get it. After getting my license, I started applying for jobs as a
driver. My challenge then was the fact that I didn't have a car and
most of the driving jobs had crazy hours, which means I would
have to start around 2:00 AM. The last time I checked, buses didn't
operate at 2:00 AM and, even though I was able to land a job, I
had no way to get there.
I kept asking and looking for a job until that one day a new
guy came to deliver milk at the supermarket. After a short (really,
really short) conversation with him, he told me that his friend, who
owned a small dairy company, was looking for a driver.
He asked ifI knew how to drive a truck, and I told him yes. The
fact of the matter was that I had never been inside a truck before,
and, therefore, had never driven one. I showed up for the job
The Deed Hunter
interview. I was so afraid that I wouldn't get the job (because my
driver's license was from another state) that I told the owner that
I used to be a truck driver in Brazil and I needed the job because
my wife was pregnant.
I have to ask you not to judge my character, and I know that one
shouldn't lie. Not trying to justify myself, but I just want to say that
I really needed that job, especially because they were offering $350
a week. The catch-22 was that I had to be at the depot around 2: 30
AM and I still didn't have a car.
If you are familiar with Newark, New Jersey, you know how far
the Town of Elizabeth is. The dairy company was in Elizabeth and,
to get there by driving, it was about a 25-minute ride.
After finishing the interview, I knew two things: number 1, I
didn't have a car, and number 2, I could not lose another opportunity.
I went home and started counting all the money I had
saved up (at this point I had already paid my mom the money she
gave me for the flight ticket) and I was able to scramble 70 bucks.
Since I was determined to get that job, I went to Toys "R" Us and
bought a bicycle.
The only route I could use to go to work was through downtown
Newark. If you have never been through downtown Newark, I
will describe it to you: it is the closest you can get to a "Walking
Dead" scenario.
I made a choice, and I had a dream and a goal.
I remember the day before my first day at work, having a panic
attack, thinking, "How in the world am I going to drive that truck?"
Pretty soon, I would understand how the universe works in one's
favor if one only takes the first step.
I couldn't sleep the night before. I closed my eyes and my mind
turned into a big truck simulator. I could see myself sitting inside
the truck, I could see the panel, and I could feel the timing I was
supposed to shift gears. I saw and felt myself doing wide-open turns
and looking at the side mirrors to make sure my back tires weren't
going over the curb.
In my mind, I considered myself a truck driver.
Chapte1r : TheB irtho f TheD eedH unter
When I arrived at work, the company owner asked me where
I had parked my car. He was shocked to learn that I had ridden a
bicycle to work. We were in November, it was winter, and it was
snowing.
He once again asked if I had experience driving a truck, and,
after spending last night inside a truck simulator, I was confident
enough to tell him that I was a very experienced driver.
I loaded the truck, and I was hoping to go by myself when he
told me that he was going to ride with me to teach me the route.
That was when I started to panic. I thought, "Jeez, he's about to
find out that I have no clue on how to drive that truck!" As we
walked towards the truck, I took the driver's side, got in the truck,
and sat behind the wheel. As I was getting ready to start the engine,
I started to mentally evoke the Holy Spirit. My boss turned to me
and said, "Wait a minute, you don't know the route. Let me drive,
so you can learn the way."
At that moment, inside my head, I was screaming "Hallelujah"
and "Praise the Lord"!
I know many people who would not take that job, but, as I said,
when you take the first step, even though you don't have all the
details figured out, the universe will work in your favor.
I trained for two weeks and, after that, I had figured out how to
drive that big truck.
Part of my route was to deliver dairy products to dozens oflunch
trucks inside the Port of Elizabeth. One day I stopped by a regular
customer to make a delivery and Paul (the customer) asked me if
I knew anyone who knew how to cook. His short-order cook had
quit the job. Keep in mind that I didn't speak much English at that
time. I asked Paul how much was the position paid weekly, and he
told me $400. I told him that I knew a very smart guy who was an
awesome cook. He asked me to give the candidate his information
and I looked at him and said, "Paul, that won't be necessary,
because you are looking at your candidate." He smiled and asked
me ifI had experience. Trusting the universe one more time, I told
him, "Paul, I was a cook back in Brazil." At that moment, all that
The Deed Hunter
I cared about was the extra money that would bring me closer to
my $ 800 a week goal.
I drove back to the depot and that was a very sweet ride back.
I still had to deliver the news to my boss and, when I did that, he
surprised me, offering more money. He asked how much Paul
was going to pay me and I said $450. He offered me $450 to stay. I
got an almost raise of 35% in just a couple of weeks of working as
a driver because I was always looking for new opportunities. But
I still had to break the news to Paul. The next morning, when I
arrived at Paul's lunch truck, I told him that my boss made me an
offer after knowing that I was leaving. Paul asked me how much
my boss offered me and I said $500. Paul hesitated for a second,
and then said, "You better stick with them."
Nevertheless, I let him know how grateful I was for the opportunity,
not yet knowing that the universe would interfere in my
favor once again.
A couple of weeks later, Paul had hired a new cook, but the guy
didn't work out. Paul was getting desperate because they were
planning to build a new shopping mall, and his lunch truck was
parked right in front of the construction site. He was expecting at
least 1000 hungry construction workers to pass by his place every
day, and he only had a few months to train a new cook.
He offered me again the job. This time, he went the whole nine
yards and offered me $550 just to make sure I would take the job.
I told him yes, and that was another happy ride back to the depot.
I walked inside my boss' office the same way I had done before and
told him that Paul had offered me $600 a week. My boss couldn't
believe that, and now it was his turn to let me go.
On my first day, Paul gave me the choice to communicate with
him in English or Greek. That was so awesome that up to this date
I can't thank him enough for all I have learned from him. I was
forced to learn English or die.
With my new salary rate, things started happening faster and
faster, and my new goal was to get myself a car and get a part-time
job. I could smell the $800 a week salary. I was getting close.
Chapte1r : TheB irtho f TheD eedH unter
After getting my first car, a 1997 Dodge Plymouth Caravan,
I was able to land my part-time job as a waiter at a place called
"Crystal Plaza".
Crystal Plaza is still the 3rd best place to get married in the U.S.
They throw all kinds of parties, weddings, bar and bat mitzvahs,
funerals, you name it.
After getting the part-time job, my week schedule would look
like this: I started my week on Monday at 4:00 AM and worked
until 4:00 PM at Paul's. My schedule was the same on Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday. After finishing my shift
around 4:00 PM, I had to start at the Crystal Plaza around 6:00 AM
and work until 3:00 AM. If you are doing the math, I worked every
Friday about 23 hours straight, but it didn't stop there. I would get
home around 4:00 AM on Saturday and take a 4-hour nap. I had
to be back at Crystal Plaza around 9:00 AM, where I would work
at two parties. I would get home from that shift around 4:00 AM
on Sunday and be back at 9:00 in the morning. I would do two
parties and get home on Monday around 2:00 AM, take a 2-hour
nap and go straight to the lunch truck to work until Monday at
4:00 PM. You are probably tired just by reading this, now imagine
how I would feel having to work all these hours.
Life was good. I was killing myself, but I had conquered my goal
in just four months. I was feeling like a millionaire. I was getting paid
$800 a week between two jobs. That's just about 92 hours a week.
After conquering my goal, the question was how long could I
keep doing that.
Working at Crystal Plaza got me involved with high-class culinary,
so one day after observing the chefs, I thought to myself, "I
NEED TO LEARN THAT". IfI learned that, I could get a better
job. You see, even though I had achieved my goal, I was far from
stopping.
One of my friends, who also worked at Crystal Plaza, worked
at an Italian restaurant during the week. Because he was going to
travel to Brazil, he asked me to meet him at his other job, so we
could make an arrangement on how to drive him to the airport.
The Deed Hunter
So I went to the Italian restaurant, his other job. While I was
waiting to talk to him, I ordered food and got the same kind of
gourmet dish, and I thought to myself one more time, "I need
to learn how to cook something like this". I was fortunate to be
introduced to the chef and restaurant owner, and I didn't hesitate
to ask him ifI could work there for free a couple of hours a week
so that I could learn how to cook.
Virgil, the restaurant owner, told me that he was going to think
about that and asked me to come back a week later.
Next Wednesday, after my 12-hour shift cooking at the lunch
truck, I stopped by the restaurant to see ifI could work for Virgil
in order to learn all his culinary secrets.
That's when the universe decided to intervene again.
As we sat down at the table, Virgil started to explain that he
wouldn't be able to let me work there for free. However, he had a
better proposition for me.
He began telling me that he was very impressed and, after being
in the U.S. for almost three decades (he was Brazilian as well) he had
never heard, nor anybody had ever asked him if they could work
for free in order to learn.
He told me that he had the restaurant for about 13 years, that
he made a lot of money, but, because of the nature of the business,
he didn't have time to enjoy his money. I could tell by the way he
was running the business that his lack of motivation and ambition
was driving the business to the ground.
He apologized for not being able to let me work there for free,
but he wanted me to be his business partner. I was shocked. What
did he mean by being his business partner?
He told me what I already knew about not being motivated and
that he just wasn't into the business anymore. Then, he asked me
how much money I was making a week and how much money I
had to put into the business.
I told him that I was making $800 a week and that I had been able
to save up around $15,000 dollars, and, as he could see, I wasn't yet
in a position to buy his business. He looked at the ceiling, paused
Chapte1r : TheB irtho f TheD eedH unter
for a second, and said, "Marcos, here's what I'm going to do. I'm
going to value this restaurant at USD $300.000,00. You put your
$15,000 in, which will give you a 5% stake in the business. I will
teach you everything that I know, and the business will pay you a
$1000 salary. Every week, we will pay all the expenses, and you will
have a 5% profit. What do you say?"
I couldn't believe my ears! It had been only 13 months since I
moved to America, and I was having the opportunity to have my
own business. Little voices started to battle inside my head. My
positive voice was as happy and motivated as any human being
could be, but, on the other hand, my negative voice was saying,
"You are crazy if you take this deal. It's too good to be true. Who
in the world would offer something like this? Be careful! Once you
give him your money, he will say that he never sold you anything.
You're not American. You don't speak English. Etc., etc., etc."
For a moment, I closed my eyes and a fast movie went through
my head. All the sacrifices and long hours working to save that
money could be gone in a second. I consider myself a risk-taker, and,
after a moment, I said to my little negative voice, "Screw you! I will
take the deal, and, if something happens, I will work hard again."
I have more to gain than I have to lose.
The next day, I quit both my jobs and started working on my
business. The U.S. is the best place to have a business, but it is the
worst place to have a job. Don't you agree with me? Just take a look
at the tax laws, and you will see it.
Thirteen months after arriving in the U.S., I had conquered my
''American Dream". I had my business and 13 employees. I owed a
great deal to my team. They were always very patient. They taught
me English and I had learned a great deal about the business with
them. As I write this chapter of my story, I kind of feel like Leonardo
DiCaprio in the movie "Catch Me if You Can".
After I started at the restaurant, I was all about cooking and food.
I ate, slept, and breathed restaurant. I only watched Food Network
shows. I only read food magazines. I tried to learn as much as I could
about the business, and the business was good.
The Deed Hunter
Many people, and perhaps yourself, might be thinking how
lucky I was to have that opportunity. I will tell you this, I don't
believe in luck.
Being lucky to me is the equivalent of winning the lottery without
buying a ticket.
There are three pillars that support wealth: business, real estate,
and stocks.
I had got one down. I had two more to go.
I'm going to make the long story short (I have to save something
for my second book). After working at the restaurant for about 13
months, I began to ponder ifI wanted to end up like Virgil.
If you ever worked in the restaurant field, you will relate to
what I'm about to mention. I had become a slave to the restaurant
industry. I was 25 at that time and was already starting to get burnt
out. Virgil was done. I had about 45% of the business at that time.
He refused to invest in the business to make it better, so, after visiting
the great state of Florida, I had decided to get out and move
to Florida. Because I wouldn't go back and get a job, I called my
cousin who was getting divorced and offered to buy her former
husband's FedEx route.
That was the perfect opportunity for me. I would have my own
business, and I only had to run Monday to Friday. I could enjoy
weekends and holidays with my wife and son (yes, I managed to
date and get married), and still make decent money.
Thirty days later, I was living in the sunshine state. It was the
early 2000 and real estate was booming. Time to work on my second
pillar, I began investing in real estate.
You probably remember back in 2000 how easy it was to get
approved for a house.
I started my real estate business and was doing the same as everybody
else, buying a house with little or no money down, renting
it, and buying another one.
From 2000 to 2004, I had acquired about 12 houses. That's
when a friend gave me a book called "The 16% Solution". Because
I wasn't a good reader, I did what every bad reader does when they
Chapte1r : TheB irtho f TheD eedH unter
get a book. I went over the book looking for pictures. Since there
weren't any, I used that excuse to put the book away.
In reality, the major reason why I didn't read the book was that
I thought I already knew everything there was about real estate.
Most of the time, what you know is more dangerous than what
you don't know. Do you know why?
Simply because knowing about something will put you in a
prideful mindset. That will close your mind to new things and
new opportunities.
That book would have introduced me to the two strategies that
made me a millionaire years later. What did I do? I put the book in
a drawer in my office, never read it, and went on with my busy life.
I have to ask you one thing, how many opportunities cross your
life every day, and you do this same thing?
I was able to grow my FedEx business to three trucks and, in May
2006, I sold my small transportation business. I was then officially
retired, and I was doing only real estate. I had grown my real estate
business to 17 properties and my dream then was to have my own
flipping TV show.
I had migrated from Food Network shows to HGTV shows.
Real estate was booming and life was good.
Now, if you remember what happened in 2007, you have probably
figured out that my retirement didn't last long.
The housing crisis hit Florida around October 2006. I lost 16
of my 17 properties.
When the crisis started, I was working on a property outside
Florida. That was the only one I was able to save.
I had lost almost all of my properties. I decided to move to
Houston.
I was forced to go back to FedEx, and I started to drive a truck
again.
My short real estate career was over. My credit was ruined, and I
didn't have any money to invest. As a matter offact, after my family
and I moved to Houston, we didn't have money to fix our water
heater. We had to take cold showers for over a month!
The Deed Hunter
Around 2008/2009, almost five years after my friend gave me
the book "The 16% Solution", I was cleaning my office. Well, let
me tell you that I clean my office more often than every five years.
Anyway, I found the book once more and decided to finally read it.
That book changed my life. It was the seed that changed the lives
of hundreds of others.
I felt like a fool for not reading the book earlier. I could not sleep
thinking of how much money I could have made ifl had read that
book in 2004.
Because of that book, today I have an international business
and travel around the world teaching about tax liens and tax deeds.
I have students who started with nothing and have made hundreds
of thousands of dollars.
I had done over 350 transactions. I have bought properties for
as low as $31.28.
Recently, I purchased a property in Montgomery County that
is worth over a million dollars by paying only $6,342. 79!
In the next chapters, you will learn all about Tax Liens and Tax
Deeds. You will see how these two strategies are the fastest and the
safest way to build wealth. Are you ready to learn how to build
wealth without risk?
I hope you will enjoy this book, and that it can have the same
effect on your life as the other one had on mine.
CHAPTE2R:
The BasicsFirsTt
hingFsi rst
PROPERTTAYX ES
Property taxes are used towards:
• Law enforcement;
• Fire department;
• Parks and recreation;
• Road construction and maintenance;
• Public schools, and other public services needs.
Whenar ep roperttayx esd ue?
Property taxes are usually due in November, but you can make
your payment up to the last day of April.
The Deed Hunter
Whaht appenifs th eo wnedro esnp'ta yh ist axes?
If the county doesn't receive the payment, it then attaches a Tax
Lien on that property.
A Tax Lien is a first position lien on the property.
Whadt oe"sf irspt ositioline n"m ean?
American law is based on the English Law Code. In Great Britain,
the King and the Queen must be paid first. In America, there
are no kings or queens, so the Government plays the king's role.
The Government must be paid first! Always!
You might be thinking, "What's the advantage of having a first
position lien if the county doesn't receive the unpaid taxes? It won't
solve the county's cash flow issue ... "
The Counties' exit strategy is to offer Tax Lien Certificates and
Tax Deeds as a way to get the money they need to provide services
that the population requires.
WHAATR ET AXD EEDASN DT AXL IENC ERTIFICATES?
What exactly are Tax Lien Certificates and Tax Deeds?
Tax Lien Certificates are documents issued by the county to
cover a lien that was left on a property, which has unpaid property
taxes for a certain period of time.
A Tax Deed foreclosure gives the county the authority to sell the
property to collect the delinquent taxes and transfer the property
rights to the buyer. Such sales are called "tax deed sales".
Chapte2r : TheB asics- FirstT hingFs irst
RegulatbeydL aw
The beauty of these two strategies is that state law regulates
TD and TLC investing. It doesn't matter how the economy is
doing, who the President is, or the stock market fluctuation. You
will always get either a rich percentage or a property that equals a
huge profit.
1.t
-~---~ ,-- -..
,r '
,, '
- REEDEMADBELE DS -TAX LIENC ERTIFICATES
-TAX DEED - HYBRI(DL IENS& DEEDS)
TO SEE THE COLORED MAP, ACCESS THE WEBSITE WWW.THEDEEDHUNTERWORLD
AreT axL ienC ertificataensd T axD eedsso methinnegw ?
Not really. These two strategies have been used since 300 BC
by the Roman Empire. In America, one of the most ancient documents
about this matter was a Tax Lien Certificate issued against
the Monticello Castle. Thomas Jefferson, the owner and 3rd President
of the U.S., would have lost his property if John Adams, 2nd
President, had not agreed to lend him money to save his property.
The Deed Hunter
WAYYSO UC ANB UYT D& TLC
There are many ways you can buy Tax Liens Certificates and
Tax Deeds. Each county will adopt the method(s) they find more
appropriate for their needs. Let's see each one of those methods
in detail:
LiveA uctions
Exactly as the name suggests, the bids are made in real-time, in
a live auction. Some counties conduct live auctions at the local
courthouse. The auctions may last a day or a few hours, depending
on the number of properties or tax liens/deeds being offered.
OnlinAeu ctions
Thanks to the internet, you don't need to leave your home to
buy a Tax Deed or a Tax Lien Certificate. The auction companies
follow the rules dictated by the counties, so make sure to check the
sale date and learn all the details. Have in mind that you might be
required to make a deposit prior to the auction.
Ovetrh ec ounter
If you live in another state or even in another country, it might
be a good idea to focus your searches on states that sell "over the
counter".
When buying "over the counter" you do not need to participate
in an auction.
You will always be able to acquire Tax Lien Certificates or Tax
Deeds receiving the maximum interest rate paid by that county
and will not have to compete with anyone else. You can also find
Tax Deeds over the counter as well.
Chapte2r : TheB asics- FirstT hingFsi rst
There are 3144 counties in the U.S., and each county carries
typically around 3500 to 4500 properties on their lists. All you
have to do is pay the amount due for taxes (plus costs and fees) and
the property is yours.
BIDDINMGE THODS
Let's take a look at some of the bidding methods used by the
counties on a tax sale auction.
Biddinag p remiuomrb onuasm ount
Bidding on any particular Tax Lien Certificate at the auction
begins with the total amount of delinquent taxes, interest accrued,
penalties, and any other legal costs.
The winner is the one who offers the largest cash amount added
to the amount due.
Biddindgo wtnh ei nteresrat te
Bidding on any particular lien at auction begins at the maximum
interest rate allowed by law. Investors offer bids in a declining
manner (as in first 16%, then 15%, 14%, etc.). The winner will be
the investor who is willing to accept the least amount of interest
for his/her investment.
Biddindgo wan p ercentaogfeo wnership
Bidding on any particular lien at auction begins at 100% ownership.
Investors offer bids in a declining manner ( as in first 100%,
then 99%, 98%, etc.) with the winner being the investor who is
The Deed Hunter
willing to accept the least amount of interest position of ownership
for his/her investment.
Rotationbaidl ding
The auctioneer begins with the first parcel listed in the advertisement
and asks the party in the first designated seat if he/she
is interested in property # 1. If not, he proceeds to the party in
the following seat until everyone in the room has been offered an
opportunity to bid in. Then the auctioneer starts with property
#2 all over from the beginning.
CHAPTE3R:
Tax Lien
Certificates
WHAAT RET AXL IENC ERTIFICATES
ANDT HEIRA DVANTAGES?
When a landowner fails to pay the taxes owed on his to her property,
the county in which the property is located has the authority
to place a lien certificate on the property. A Tax Lien Certificate
is a legal claim against a property for unpaid taxes. If the property
owner comes to pay their taxes late, they will pay interest on whatever
was owed, plus other penalties and fees that the county places
on top of it. But since the county can't wait until the homeowner
pays their property tax, because the county needs the money to
continue operating, they will hold a tax lien sale.
A Tax Lien Certificate sale is when the county sells the interest
placed on the properties that have delinquent taxes to third-party
investors. The sales are held in an auction format, that is public and
anyone can participate in those sales. The only exceptions to participate
in a tax sale are: county employees or their relatives; property
owners or anyone with an interest in that particular property, and if
you owe taxes to the county you are trying to buy a property from.
The Deed Hunter
AdvantagineI ns vestiningT axL ienC ertificates
1. Safe strategy: it doesn't matter how the market or economy
fluctuates, the return of the percentage is fixed. It is legal and
guaranteed by law;
2. When you invest on a Tax Lien Certificate, the property owner
must repay the investor the full amount of the lien, plus the
interest the county placed on it (and depending on the county,
you can receive anywhere from S to 36% interest on your
money). You don't find these rates of return anywhere else;
3. The repayment schedule (return on investment) usually lasts
from six months to three years;
4. If the property owner does not pay for the property, the lien
holder (investor) has the authority to foreclose on the property,
just as the county would have done, but they sold that
right to you, and you'll end up with the property free and clear
for the price you paid plus the deed application process fee;
S. Each state has its own interest rates and its own redemption
periods. There are many options to invest in.
In Summary
Investing in Tax Lien Certificates is always a win-win situation.
You will either receive S to 36% of interest on your money back,
guaranteed and backed up by the county; or you will end up with
the property.
HOWD OT AXL IENC ERTIFICAWTEOSR K?
When someone owes property taxes on a property, ( every tax due
date is in April) and the property owner doesn't make a payment,
on the following month(s) (depending on state law), the counties
will make those liens available to investors.
Chapte3r : TaxL ienC ertificates
You are purchasing two rights that the county has on the properties,
and they are:
1. To collect the interest rate (penalty) that the owner of the
property pays on the delinquent taxes; and
2. The right of the property in case the homeowner decides
not to pay the property tax during the redemption period (a
"grace period" that the county gives to the property owner
to pay for the delinquent taxes). The period varies by state,
from six months to three years.
In order for you to end up with the property, when you purchase
a Tax Lien Certificate, a few things must happen first:
1. The owner did not pay the property tax during the redemption
period;
2. The counties are reluctant to take people's real estate properties
without good cause, so the steps to acquire property
must be followed to the letter. But if you follow the proper
steps dictated by law, you'll be fine;
3. It is a good idea for you to hire a tax lien lawyer in order to
make sure you are following all the rules. In most states, you
can get the money you spent on legal expenses back;
4. In a normal scenario, liens are paid off in the order they are
recorded ( the oldest lien is paid first). A Tax Lien Certificate
is considered to be a "senior" to all other liens, which means
that they are always paid first.
For example, when someone wants to buy a house, in order
to get a mortgage on the house, the bank will do a title search to
make sure there are no liens on the property. If the property is
clear, the bank will finance the house for him/her. Then, they'll
record the mortgage on the house. That is the first lien recorded
on the property. If they take on a second mortgage on the house,
there is another lien recorded on the property, and so on and so
forth. When a Tax Lien Certificate is acquired on the house, the
Tax Lien Certificate goes to the front of the line of all other liens,
The Deed Hunter
and it becomes the first lien on the property, the most important
one which will be paid first.
Practiceaxl amploefsh owa TaxL ienC ertificawteosr ks
1. There is a property with an FMV (fairmarketvalue) of$1SS,000.
The mortgage on it is $130,000. The taxes owed on that property
is only $1,328, from the year 2011. lt is due in April 2012;
2. If the county does not receive payment for the property taxes,
it will put a lien on the property, and it will sell the lien to
investors;
3. As an investor, after making the proper due diligence, you
will go to the county, and you will buy the lien on that property.
The county will give you the Tax Lien Certificate that
states that whenever the taxes on the properties are paid, you
will receive the interest the property owner will pay. In this
example, the interest rate is 24%;
4. After you have purchased the Tax Lien Certificate, the parties
with interest on the property must be notified that they have
a window ( or "redemption period") to pay the delinquent
taxes with interest;
S. When the homeowner or the party with interest on the property
pays the delinquent taxes, they will pay $1,646 (that is
the $1,328 owed+ 24% interest on top of it);
6. The county will collect the payment, and by law, they have
four days to send the check to you with the amount you
invested + the interest.
Remember: If the property owner does not redeem the property
(pay for the delinquent taxes) during the redemption period,
the first lien holder can apply to get the property, and he/she will
end up with the property for the price they paid for the Tax Lien
Certificate.
Back to our example ...
Chapte3r : TaxL ienC ertificates
1. The redemption period expired. You will contact the county
and tell them you want to apply for the deed;
2. You will send the county a check for $79.00 so that the county
can process the deed application;
3. All the other liens are wiped out (e.g. the mortgage) and
eliminated, and you will receive the deed for the property,
which is worth $155,000;
4. After acquiring the property, you can sell it for 60% of the fair
market value in order to sell it fast: and you will get $95,000
free and clear, as a profit.
Whaat ret her edemptiroante s?
Depending on the types of property you are willing to buy,
some liens are more likely to be redeemed than others. Singlefamily
homes, agricultural land, and single-purpose commercial
properties have a 97 to 98% of chance to be redeemed during the
redemption period.
These types of properties are usually all the owner has, so they
are less likely to lose their property over delinquent taxes.
Properties like vacant land or industrial land have a 60 to 65%
chance of being redeemed.
Usually, owners of these types of properties don't really care
about the property or don't have an immediate use for it, so they
might not care to lose it.
If your goal is to invest in Tax Lien Certificates so that you can
end up with the property, you should invest in low-end houses, in
more distressed neighborhoods, and you will most likely get the
property.
If you don't want to deal with the property and all the hassle
that might come with it, or you are not comfortable in owning real
estate, you should buy Tax Lien Certificates on high-end properties,
as they are more likely to be redeemed.
The Deed Hunter
To avoid 99% of the risks on Tax Lien Certificates investing,
don't buy tax liens on commercial or industrial land. There are
a lot of problems that can be hidden in these types of properties.
My advice: invest in Tax Lien Certificates on single-family homes.
INTERERSATT EOSN T AXL IENC ERTIFICATES
ANNUALISZTEADTV ES F. IXEFDL ARTA TSET ATE
AnnualizSetda te
Guarantee rate paid by the county over a 12-month period.
Return is set when the Tax Lien Certificate is redeemed. For example,
Iowa guarantees a 24% per year, meaning 2% per month, so
the number of months the homeowner is delinquent affects how
much your return will be. If they pay 3 months after the due date,
at 2% per month, you will receive 6% interest on your investment.
FixeFdl aRt ateS tate
Guarantee a fixed rate of return on a 12-month period regardless
of the redemption period. For example, if you purchase a Tax Lien
Certificate in Georgia with a rate of return of20% per year, and the
homeowner pays the lien the following month (after it was due),
you will still receive 20% interest on your money.
HYBRISDT ATES
Some states are hybrids ( they offer both strategies: Tax Lien
Certificates and/or Tax Deeds). But differently from the other states
that offer one strategy throughout the state, hybrid states may offer
Chapte3r : TaxL ienC ertificates
Tax Lien Certificates and Tax Deeds in every county, one strategy
in some counties and the other one in others. Some offer Tax Lien
Certificates in one jurisdiction and Tax Deeds in other jurisdictions
within the same county.
See the list below:
NewY ork
You have to carefully check with each jurisdiction to determine
how they conduct their sale. In some counties that have Tax Deed
sales, you will find villages and towns that have Tax Lien Certificates
sales.
Ohio
Those counties with a population higher than 200,000 people
may offer Tax Lien Certificate sales. Otherwise, the tax sale is a
public oral bid foreclosure sale of real estate.
The courts must confirm all sales.
Florida
In the state of Florida, for example, if a Tax Lien Certificate does
not redeem during the redemption period, the property goes to a
Tax Deed sale in order to satisfy the tax lien.
If you did your due diligence and purchased a Tax Lien Certificate
on a decent property, in order to get the property, you will
have to bid against other investors at the Tax Deed sale.
Thus, if you are interested in obtaining property in Florida,
then Tax Deed investing is the way to go, not Tax Lien Certificate
investing.
The Deed Hunter
Nevada
As in Florida, Nevada starts the tax sale process with a Tax Lien
Certificate sale. If the property is not redeemed, it goes to a secondary
sale: Tax Deed sale or special assessment sale.
RIGHTOSF T HED ELINQUEONWTN ER
The property owner has a few rights, even though an investor
bought the Tax Lien Certificate for his/her property. The owner's
rights are:
1. The right to stay on the property;
2. The right to not have the investor going to his/her property
to bother him/her (in some states, it is against the law for the
lien holder to contact the property owner);
3. The right to a redemption period; and
4. The right to challenge the sale.
For example, you participated in an auction, and you bought a Tax
Lien Certificate. It's unlikely to happen (because if the homeowner
didn't have a thousand bucks to pay for the taxes of the property,
what are the chances they'll have the money to hire a lawyer to challenge
the sale?!), but the few homeowners that do cancel the sale,
they must show evidence that:
• He/she paid the taxes and the county made an error and put
the property lien up for sale anyway;
• The county didn't follow the law in selling the property (for
example, they failed to publically announce the sale for that
property);
• The "party with interest in the property" (homeowner or the
bank) claims not being properly notified that a tax lien was
filed to the property.
Chapte3r : TaxL ienC ertificates
WHATTO D OI FT HEP ROPERITSYN 'TR EDEEMED?
At this point, you are probably asking yourself, "The redemption
period has ended, nobody came forward to pay for the delinquent
taxes, therefore the property was not redeemed. What happens
next? What do I, as an investor, need to do now?"
You will need to do one of two things, depending on the jurisdiction:
• All the investor needs to do is apply for a Tax Deed, after
providing evidence that he/she has notified all parties with
interest (the bank, the homeowner, etc.) on the property;
• The application for a Tax Deed includes a number of other
requirements that the investor must do before completing
the process to get the property.
We would like to emphasize that if you are going to invest in a
county, and you are not familiar with the rules, you should get a
real estate lawyer to guide you through the process, at least for the
first few times you do this.
RESPONSIBILOITFITE HSEI N VESTOR
In most states, the Tax Lien Certificate investor must:
1. Notify everyone that has an interest in a property that a Tax
Lien Certificate has been purchased on it ( title search);
2. Complete any other requirements established by the jurisdiction
that you are purchasing the Tax Lien Certificate from
(consult your lawyer).
The Deed Hunter
HIRINGAN A TTORNEY
In some foreclosure cases, it is required that the investor always
retains knowledgeable counsel during the process.
It is not difficult hiring a lawyer. However, don't just hire any
attorney, make sure you get a real estate attorney that understands
the application process for the Tax Deed and knows the jurisdiction
very well.
When you do an out-of-state transaction, it is better to hire a
lawyer that will complete all the paperwork for you, because they
have malpractice insurance (in case they make a mistake) that will
cover any cost in case he didn't do his job properly.
If you take a chance and try to do this on your own in order to
save a few hundred dollars, and you make a mistake, all the costs
will be on you.
Keep in mind that in most states you can get a part of legal
expenses back. There is no need to NOT hire a lawyer.
Our advice: To have peace of mind in a foreclosure process,
hire a lawyer that is knowledgeable with the state laws and that
will complete the process for you the right way. You might not
need an attorney for every case, but it is good to have one in your
back pocket.
THER ISKOS FI NVESTININGT AXL IENC ERTIFICATES
With every investment you make, there is a risk and a reward.
The risks of the Tax Lien strategy are:
Buyinag T axL ienC ertificatthea ty ou
don'ht ave nouginhf ormatiaobno uit .
To overcome this risk: FOLLOW THE DUE DILIGENCE
PROCESS.
Chapte3r : TaxL ienC ertificates
If you'rneo tf ullya waroe ft her uleso ft hats tate/counatnyd a llt he
thingyso un eedto d ot og ett hep roperty.
To overcome this risk: HIRE A LAWYER.
Theo wnecra ncetlsh es ale
We spoke about that, and that may happen if the homeowner
can prove that they indeed paid the taxes to the county, or the sale
of the Tax Lien Certificate was not publically announced; or, when
you are trying to apply for the deed and one of the parties with
interest in the property claims that they were not properly notified.
You will not lose money, but you won't make extra money either.
Subsequteanxte os rp ost-judgmteanxte s
When you participate in an auction, you need to look at the year
in which the lawsuit was filed, because if you purchase the Tax Lien
Certificate on a property, you will be responsible for what is called
"post-judgment taxes", which are the taxes for the years following
the lawsuit. So keep in mind that, if you don't pay those taxes, a
new Tax Lien Certificate will be sold on those, and that new lien
trumps your lien.
Expiration
Remember that a Tax Lien Certificate has a shelf life of seven
years. Something will need to be done within those seven years, or
the Tax Lien Certificate will no longer be valid. In most states, if
the Tax Lien Certificate expires, and you have not applied for the
deed or foreclosure on the property, the Tax Lien Certificate you
hold will be worthless.
The Deed Hunter
If youd on'rte cortdh eT axL ienC ertificate
In most states, the taxing authorities will automatically record
the Tax Lien Certificate for you. But if they do not do that, it is
your responsibility to record your Tax Lien Certificate. If the state
does not do that automatically for you, and you do not do that
yourself, you will lose all your investment.
Makinagr rangemewnittsht h e
homeowndeirre ctloyn y ouor wn
In some states, it is against the law to contact the homeowner
directly to negotiate with them the payment of the Tax Lien
Certificate.
Make sure to ask your attorney if it is allowable by law for you
to contact the homeowner, especially if you plan to file for the
Tax Deed at the end of the redemption period. The proper legal
documentation must be sent to the homeowner and all the parties
with interest in the property. So, if you have a verbal agreement
with them, you would be breaking protocol, and could potentially
be breaking the law, which would result in you losing the security
of your lien.
TheP roperhtya sa contaminantiotnic e
If you bought a Tax Lien Certificate on a property that has
a contamination notice (that usually happens with commercial
properties) and you have the chance to file a deed to acquire the
property, DO NOT DO THAT unless you are qualified to evaluate
the cleanup costs.
In this case, it is better for you to lose the money you used to
purchase the Tax Lien Certificate (say $500 or even $1000) than
getting the deed for the property and being liable for the decontamination
costs.
In some cases, those can go as high as a million dollars.
Chapte3r : TaxL ienC ertificates
Bid Rigging
That is when you ask other bidders how much they are planning
on spending, what they are planning on buying at that auction, or
if you ask them how they will split up their parcels. You may go to
jail if you do that, and your purchase will be considered invalid as
well. Respect the auction format for your own sake.
Just remember that we can eliminate 99% of these risks if we have
knowledge about how the system works and if we know what we
are doing. You can avoid most of the risks if you shop for family
homes only, or stay within residential areas.
The rewards of this business are tremendous and really worth
your time and effort. Don't worry! We are going to teach you how
to overcome the risks so that you can make money.
Also, remember that you don't need to buy Tax Lien Certificates
at auctions alone. As mentioned in Chapter 1, you can go to the
county in person or search online to purchase Tax Lien Certificates
over the counter.
To download a free and multicolor Tax Deed and Tax Lien
infographic, go to www.the24secret.com.
CHAPTE4R:
Tax Deeds
WHAAT RET AXD EEDS?
When you buy a property at a Tax Deed sale, you are getting
the property itself, rather than looking to make interest on your
investment.
TAXD EESDA LE
This is when the county sells properties that have delinquent
taxes on them. They are held in an auction format, are open to
the public, and anyone can participate in those sales. The only
ones who cannot participate in a tax sale are: county employees or
their relatives, property owners, or anyone with an interest in that
particular property, and if you owe taxes to the county from which
you are trying to buy a property.
For a Tax Deed sale, the county will ask you to acquire a form
called Non-Delinquent Tax Statement, which says that you do not
The Deed Hunter
owe taxes to the county that is hosting the auction, therefore you
are free and clear to purchase Tax Deeds during the auctions. You
will need to submit the form to the Tax Assessor Collector's office
from five to seven days before the auction date. The form costs
about $10 and, in most cases, it is valid for three months.
When someone owes taxes on a property, (say, every tax due date
is in April) and the property owner doesn't make the payment, the
following month(s), on Tax Lien Certificate states, the counties
will make those liens available to investors.
On Tax Deed states, in most cases, the county will wait another
year for the owner to come in and pay his or her delinquent taxes.
If the owner doesn't pay within that time frame, the county will
start a foreclosure process, and then they will put the property up
for auction. There are two different ways the county can auction
off a property:
• 1. They will sell the property for a minimum bid that includes
taxes, penalties, interests, and costs;
Example: If you have a property where the owner owes $6,000
in back taxes, and it is worth $200,000, but the owner doesn't pay
for it during the following 365-day period, the county will put that
property up for auction with the starting bid at $6,000 (back taxes
+penalties+ interest+ fees+ costs).
• 2. They will sell the property for a minimum bid that relates
to a percentage of the market value of the property;
You may go to the county's Tax Assessor Collector's office website
to find out which of the two formats they adopted to sell their
Tax Deeds. Most counties use the system where the minimum bid
is the amount owed in taxes, plus costs.
Chapte4r : TaxD eeds
HOWD OT AXD EEDWSO RK?
Practical example:
1. There is a property with an FMV (fair market value) of
$200,000. Taxes owed on that property are $6,000 from the
year 2013 that is due in April 2014;
2. The county will wait another year for the owner to make the
payment on the property. They will wait until April 2015 for
the payment of the delinquent taxes;
3. If the county does not receive payment for the property until
then, it will put the property up for sale, with the starting bid
of the taxes owed, which means, in this case, $6,000;
4. As an investor, after making the proper due diligence, you
will go to the county auction to bid on the property. You will
end up having the highest bid and will purchase the property
for, let's say $35,000;
5. After making the payment to the county, you will receive the
deed to the property that states that the fair market value is
$200,000;
6. If the house has a mortgage or anything else, the debt is wiped
out, and you will have the property free and clear for the
amount you paid at the auction, except for superior liens,
such as IRS liens;
7. The return on your investment will depend on your exit
strategy. For this example, our exit strategy will be wholesale,
where we will sell the property to another buyer for 60% of
the fair market value, so we can get our money back quickly.
We will receive a check from the buyer in the amount of$120,000,
making our profit $85,000 in total.
The Deed Hunter
REDEEMASBTLAET ES
In some deed states, the previous property owner has the opportunity
to redeem the real estate from the newly established owner
( the investor). The redemption period varies among the states, but
generally ranges from six months to two years. There are currently
ten redeemable deed states and one territory, as follows:
• Connecticut
• Delaware
• Georgia
• Guam
• Hawaii
• Louisiana
• Massachusetts
• Pennsylvania
• Rhode Island
• Tennessee
• Texas
HOWT OB UYT AXD EEDS?
There are three ways to buy a TD:
1. Live auctions: In Texas, most auctions are held at the county's
courthouse. Bigger counties hold Tax Deed auctions every
month. In order to find out more about how the county holds
its tax deed sales, go to the Tax Assessor-Collector website of
the particular county you are interested in.
2. Online auctions: Florida holds online auctions for Tax Deeds.
3. Over-the-counter sales: These are the properties that are leftover,
or the ones that were not sold during the auctions. You
can walk into any county or go on their website to see these
properties that they have available for sale, and you will pay
only whatever tax amount is owed on the property.
Chapte4r : TaxD eeds
If the sale is a foreclosure sale for taxes, the minimum bid is taxes
+ penalties + interest + costs. In some counties, if the county has
already foreclosed on the property and it now owns the property,
the minimum bid is a percentage of the fair market value of the
property.
POST-JUDGMTEANXTE S
Keep in mind, though, that, when you participate in an auction,
you need to pay attention to the year in which the lawsuit was filed,
because, if you purchase the property, you will be responsible for
what is called the "post-judgment taxes", which are the taxes for the
years following the lawsuit. For example, if the county foreclosed
property has delinquent taxes from 2013, and the property goes to
the auction in 2015, and you purchase that property, you'll need
to pay the taxes owed from 2014 and 2015.
The risk is: you go to an auction with $5,000, and you bid all
the way up to $5,000, but you don't have the extra $2,000 for
post-judgment taxes, so there is going to be a problem. So it is very
important that you understand how the system works, understand
everything that needs to be paid once you acquire the property so
that you can avoid these types of situations.
In Summary
The level of due diligence required for a Tax Deed sale is extremely
high, since you will be purchasing the property itself. You'll have
to determine:
1. Is the property free and clear of all other liens and encumbrances?
2. How much is this property worth? What is the fair market
value? (exit strategy)
The Deed Hunter
THER ISKS
Every property that you buy, there might be a risk that comes
with it. The risks of the Tax Deed strategies are:
1. To bid on the wrong property, or one that you don't have
enough information about;
2. If you're not fully aware of the rules of that particular state/
county and all the things that you need to do;
For example, if you buy a property that you plan to sell in the
following month, and that state has a redemption period of two
years, you will not be allowed to sell the property before the redemption
period is over.
3. Administrative mistakes
For example, the county advertises the property as having three
acres. You don't do your due diligence, and after you purchase the
property, you find out it only has one acre. The county is not held
responsible for these kinds of mistakes, so it is very important that
you do your due diligence thoroughly.
4. Invalid sales
For example, if the owner comes in and invalidates the sale, or
there was some error on the sale. You will get your money back, but
you have wasted your time researching that property.
5. Bankruptcy
For example, if the owner files for bankruptcy while you are
purchasing the property, you will not lose your money, but no
other legal transactions can occur while the bankruptcy process is
going on, so you might get stuck with that property for a longer
period of time than you were anticipating.
Chapte4r : TaxD eeds
6. Subsequent taxes or post-judgment taxes
I have already mentioned post-judgment taxes, so keep in mind
that, if you don't pay those taxes, a new lien will be sold on those
and that new lien will trump your lien.
7. Make arrangements with the homeowner directly
DON'T MAKE PAYMENT PLAN ARRANGEMENTS
WITH THE PROPERTY OWNER.
Do not try to be the nice guy/gal. In some states, you may lose
the security of the real estate lien if you do so. Make sure with your
attorney first if it is ok for you to do that under the state law.
8. Bid Rigging
If you make agreements with other bidders, ask them how they
will split up their parcels or how much they plan to bid, you may
go to jail, and your purchase will be considered invalid. Respect
the auction format for your own sake.
Just remember that you can eliminate 99% of these risks if you
have knowledge about how the system works and if you know
what you are doing.
The rewards of this business are tremendous and really worth
your time and effort. Dedicate some time to learn how to overcome
the risks so that you can make money.
7 STEPTSO I NVESINT T AXD EEDS
The process of acquiring Tax Deeds is actually not complicated.
Just follow this sequence: 1) acquire the Tax Deed, 2) deal with
the paperwork, 3) apply your chosen exit strategy, and 4) get a
stunning profit.
Below, there are the steps you must follow so that you can feel
confident to start investing.
The Deed Hunter
1)G et hel isto ft axd eedfsro mth ec ounty
You can research the list of properties the county has made available
to the public that will be going to auction, or you can research
the tax deeds that were not sold in the past auctions ( those would
be in the struck-off list).
Keep in mind that some properties on the struck-off list are great
deals! Very often, there are many more properties for sale than there
are investors to purchase them. That is one of the reasons why some
great properties end up on the struck-off list. But remember, only
careful research can eliminate the risks.
2) Geta mapo ft hea rea
As part of your research, you should acquire a map from the
County Surveyor's office to mark the reference points near the area
where the property you're interested in is located. By doing that,
you can determine whether it will be easy to resell that property
or not.
3) Determitnhee b esat reatso i nvesint
At this point, we should start the elimination process of less
favorable locations and focus our attention on the best regions to
invest in.
Talk to real tors or friends who live in the area you're looking to
invest in, and consider things like school district, crime rates, etc.
Again, eliminate the problem areas from your list.
4) Organiyzoe ulri sti no rdeor ft axd eedv alue
Creating a spreadsheet might be a good idea. All the information
on the Tax Deeds you're interested in will be in one place, and you
Chapte4r : TaxD eeds
can compare them side by side. Also, you can reorganize them in
any format you want. If you list them in order of how much they
cost ( starting with the cheapest ones on the top), it will be easier
for you to determine how much you'll be willing to invest in each
one of them.
Other investors might have the same idea as you, and they will
push to buy the cheapest deeds first, and that might drive the price
up.
Now, if you have already put a cap on how much you would be
willing to spend on each property, you can control your emotions
to not overbid on a property. Remember, the goal is to have the
biggest gain possible, and not win every bid. Sometimes letting go
will be the smartest thing to do.
5)S elecsti ngle-famhiolym es
In the current market, there are more buyers of family homes
than buyers of commercial or rural properties.
The purpose of investing in Tax Deeds is to buy properties at
a really low price and sell them quickly so that you can have a fast
return on your investment, allowing you to reinvest your capital.
We suggest that you gain experience first in buying and selling
single-family homes rather than buying commercial properties,
because each type of real estate has its own peculiarities and rules,
and that may confuse you.
Once you feel confident to move on to other categories, you
should expand your investment portfolio.
The Deed Hunter
6) Gatheinr formatioonnt h ep roperty
As you organize your properties list, the following information
is what you MUST HAVE on your spreadsheet:
a. Market value of each property (you may contact a realtor to
know how much the similar properties in the near area are
being sold for and ask what is the average time to close a deal
in that area);
b. Property address;
c. Parcel number (or folio number);
cl. Owner's address;
e. Tax Deed amount;
f. Appraisal value or assessed value.
Some properties may require minor renovations to increase their
sale price. We recommend doing minor renovations, only the ones
that will impact the appearance of the property in order to sell it
faster. For example, painting, drywall repair, crown molding, and
basic landscaping.
7)M aketh ei nvestment
Get ready for the auction. Select the properties you want to
invest in, respect the cap you set for those properties, and bid only
while you are under that amount. It is very common to see investors
be carried away by their emotions with the desire to win the bid.
Avoid this risk by preparing yourself mentally. Also, when you do
not do the research properly, you may see other investors bidding
on a particular property, and you may think they know something
you don't. And then, you might feel tempted to join in the competition,
only to end up with a lemon in your hands. Avoid this risk
by researching the property and only bidding on those that you
feel are a great deal for you. Investing in Tax Deeds is an intellectual
activity. Remember to always use your head, not your heart.
Chapte4r : TaxD eeds
DIFFEREENXTITS TRATEGIES
So, you just bought yourself a property. Now what? We have
been talking about exit strategies, and we will now give you a few
options to think about. However, first and foremost, when you
think about investing in real estate, you need to have a "Buyers'
List".
A buyers' list is a list of buyers who would be interested in
purchasing your property, whether they are investors, or a family
looking for their first home. Remember to make yourself known
to these people so that they can rely on you to provide them with
reasonably priced properties.
Below, there are some exit strategies:
EXI1T# W1 holesale
Wholesale selling a property that you just bought is when you
sell the property under market value in order to sell it fast. You
don't fix or remodel the house, you sell it as is to another investor,
who will then remodel the house and sell it for more money to a
third party. You may sell your property for 60% of the fair market
value. So, if we consider our initial example, we bought the property
at a Tax Deed auction for $35,000, and its fair market value
is $200,000. In two weeks, we sold it at a wholesale price to a cash
buyer for $120,000 (60%) to make our money back quickly. We
made $85,000 in profit.
EXI1T# 2F lipfo rP rofit
Flipping for profit is when you want to remodel a property to
sell it at or above market value. After purchasing the property at a
Tax Deed auction for $35,000 keeping in mind that its fair market
value is $200,000. However, you want to do some upgrades to the
The Deed Hunter
property to make the most profit. You invest another $20,000 on
remodeling upgrades and list it for $210,000. After three months,
you spent $55,000 in total and sold it for $210,000, which results
in a $155,000 profit.
EXI#T3 Rent
Renting may be a steady source of income coming into your
bank account. This is called "passive income". You can even hire a
company to manage your property for a fraction of the rent.
EXI#T4 Mortgage
If you don't have any extra money to reinvest to keep your real
estate business running, you can get capital fast by taking out a
mortgage on the property you just bought. For example, since
you have learned that you need to operate under an entity, you
bought a house at an auction through your LLC. Then, you go
to the bank and request a mortgage to buy the house your LLC
owns. The bank lends you the mortgage money, and you can use
that capital to reinvest. Yes, you will have to pay the bank back later,
but, when you reinvest the money, you'll be getting the return on
your investment (more than the value of the mortgage loan), rather
than not letting money work for you.
To download a free and multicolor Tax Deed and Tax Lien
infographic, go to www.the24secret.com.
CHAPTE5R:
Property
Research
TAXA SSESSOR-COLLECTOR
The County Tax Assessor-Collector is a constitutional officer
mandated by the state, elected by, and directly accountable to the
people.
Assessor-Collectors are elected to 4-year terms and are one of
two constitutionally mandated, county-wide elected positions. The
Tax Assessor-Collector's office collects ad valorem tax accounts as
valued by the Appraisal District. A property tax is assessed according
to the value of property a taxpayer owns. Because property
taxes depend on the value, they are called ad valorem, meaning
"according to the value".
The County Tax Office collects property taxes for its taxing
jurisdictions. The governing body of each taxing unit sets its own
budget and tax rate.
The collections for these taxes are consolidated and collected by
the County Tax Office.
You will start your due diligence by the Tax Assessor-Collectors'
office (hopefully by their website). This is where you will look for:
The Deed Hunter
• When and where the auctions take place;
• If the Tax Assessor's office handles the auction listing, or if
those listings are managed by a law firm or collection agency;
• If they manage the listings, ask them to send them to you
(some counties will ask you to pay a small fee to cover copy,
envelope, and stamp costs);
• If the county has subsequent or struck-off lists.
If they don't have a website, you will need to call them or personally
go there to find this initial information.
ATTORNEOYF'SF ICE
Some counties hire law firms or collection agencies to collect
their property taxes debts. The county may provide you with their
contact.
Some law firms are responsible for the list of several counties.
In such offices, it is very likely that you will find the lists on their
websites.
Following is an example of an online tax listing search engine:
., 3
~--...·
1__17,1,7,S.w _eet0ove r * ,,,__,,,
1-.-. ... 14,,111,UQ
14119 Duncan Ln. Conroe TX77'302 fl ::=.:-;;: ...
Chapte5r : PropertyR esearch
APPRAISDAILS TRICT
Appraisal districts are responsible for appraising properties in
the districts for ad valorem tax purposes of each taxing unit that
imposes ad valorem taxes on property in the district. The appraisal
districts are also responsible for keeping the information on the
properties appraised.
The appraisal district is where you will search for more information
about the property that you planned to invest in. Since
many appraisal districts have all their information online (it is
public record), you may take advantage of the internet to gather
information on that property.
In order to perform a search, you will need some data you will
take from the property list, such as:
• Account number;
• Owner's name;
• Property legal description or address.
By performing a search on the appraisal district's website site,
you will find out:
• Property site (situs) or property address;
• Property owner's address (which may or may not be the
same);
• A list of exemptions for that property (if any);
• Appraisal value of the property.
The total value of the property, according to the appraisal district,
may be more or less than the current sales price of the property.
FEMA
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) is part of the
Department of Homeland Security. FEMA's mission is to support
US citizens and first responders to ensure that, as a nation, we work
The Deed Hunter
together to build, sustain and improve our capability to prepare
for, protect against, respond to, recover from and mitigate all kinds
of hazards.
When you decide to invest in Tax Lien Certificates and Tax
Deeds, you have to be prepared to become the owner of the real
estate you are investing in. So, it is important to be sure of the marketability
of your potential property. One key piece of information
is to find out if that property is in the flood area (you will not be
able to build on it) or in the flood zone (which would considerably
affect its market value).
By visiting the following link https://msc.fema.gov/portal and
entering the property address, you immediately obtain access to
that information.
COUNCTYL ERKO'FSF ICE
County Clerks are generally responsible for maintaining records
of all governing body transactions, including resolutions and ordinances.
They are responsible for keeping records of deeds and
marriage licenses, and most other public records.
There are over 3,200 County Clerks and county-equivalent
court clerks in the United States. County Clerks can help researchers
locate various physical documents, including marriage (licenses),
divorce, arrest, jail, judicial, probate, criminal, and other court
records.
To obtain access to a county directory, please go to the following
link: www.the24secret.com
CHAPTE6R:
Operating
Througah B usiness
WHYS HOULYDO UO PERATTHER OUGAH B USINESS?
There are tax advantages and asset protection guarantees when
you operate through a business.
TaxB enefits
You can write off expenses like travel, food, phone bills, portions
of car payments, medical deductions, and the list goes on. In the
particular case of Tax Lien/Deeds, you can write off expenses,
such as:
• Traveling to the counties for auction OR when you go to
check out any property that you might be interested in;
• Educational courses, such as our Hands-on Training;
• Office furnishings and supplies you'll need in order to run
your business;
• Marketing expenses for the properties you want to sell.
The Deed Hunter
OtheDr eductions
• The IRS allows self-employed business people to deduct 100%
of their health care premiums, and some other medical costs,
such as co-pays, may be tax-deductible;
• You can also write off your mortgage interest each year, mortgage
points, and private mortgage insurance. Operating a
home-based business also opens the door to writing off a
percentage of the square footage of your home office;
• If you use your car for business purposes, you can deduct: the
depreciated value of an automobile, auto licensing, repairs,
tolls, parking fees, and car mileage. However, because of the
tax benefits that come with depreciation, it may be cheaper
over time to lease a business vehicle rather than purchasing one;
• Business owners can also benefit from tax breaks on employee
pay and retirement contributions.
ResponsFibolYer ouOr wnT axes
Keep in mind that owning your business requires discipline with
regard to paying taxes. The amount owed to the IRS depends on
how much you earn, and, if you don't prepare and set aside the
necessary funds to pay your taxes, the consequences may include
paying interest on any delayed payment and the IRS can put a lien
on your bank account or real estate property.
TYPEOSF B USINESESN TITIES
Selecting the legal structure for your company is one of the most
important decisions that you will make as you start your business.
To make the best decision, you must carefully consider your initial
choice of business entity from multiple angles, including: ownership/
control of the business, asset protection, and tax minimization.
Chapte6r : OperatinTgh rougah B usiness
Each different entity that we will cover brings its own set of
advantages and disadvantages. Selecting the best entity for your
business involves considering both tax and non-tax issues.
SOLPER OPRIETORSHIP
A sole proprietorship is the most basic type of business to establish.
You alone own the company and are responsible for its assets
and liabilities. Although this is the most common form for new
small businesses, it is not necessarily the best choice when both tax
and non-tax factors are considered.
Advantages
• Simplicity;
• Little ongoing formalities;
• No need to pay unemployment tax to yourself;
• Owners may freely mix business or personal assets;
• Easy and inexpensive to set up.
Downfalls
Risky for asset protection. All the business's assets and liabilities
are treated as belonging directly to you, the business owner.
PARTNERSHIPS
A partnership is an unincorporated business with two or more
owners. This means that income and losses from the partnership
are divided among the partners, and each partner reports their share
and pays taxes at the individual tax rates.
The Deed Hunter
Advantage
Flexibility, because the share of income and losses distributed
to each partner may vary and the percentage of profits can differ
from the percentage oflosses.
Downfall
Risky for asset protection, not only can your business creditors
get to your personal assets, but you are also personally liable for
the actions of your partners.
REGULA"CR" C ORPORAT(ICO-NC ORP)
AC-corp is a separate taxpayer, with income and expenses taxed
to the corporation and not owners. It is more complex and suggested
for larger companies with multiple employees.
Advantage
Personal liability & asset protection: AC-corp is a separate entity,
the business' liability and assets are separate from the owner's own
personal assets.
Downfall
Double taxation: AC-corp is a separate taxpayer, with income
and expenses taxed to the corporation, not to the owners. If corporate
profits are then distributed to owners as dividends, owners
must pay personal income tax on the distribution. So the business
pays taxes, and the owners pay taxes as well.
Chapte6r : OperatinTgh rougah B usiness
LIMITELDIA BILITCYO MPA(NLYL C)
The LLC is an entity created and governed by state law that has
characteristics of both a corporation and a partnership. An LLC
is designed to provide:
• the limited liability features of a corporation; and
• the tax efficiencies and operational flexibility of a partnership.
Advantages
No federal income tax, unlike a corporation, LLCs are not taxed
as a separate business entity. Instead, all profits and losses "pass
through" the business to each member of the LLC. LLC members
report profits and losses on their personal federal tax returns.
Personal liability & asset protection, as the LLC is also a separate
entity where the business assets and liability are separate from the
owner's.
S CORPORAT(SIOC NO RP)
An S corporation is similar to a C corporation, but you are taxed
only on the personal level. The profits, losses, and other tax items
pass through the corporation to you and are reported on your
personal tax return.
Advantages
No federal income tax: Just like the LLC, the S corp is also a
"pass-through" type of entity.
Personal liability & asset protection: It is also a separate entity
where the business assets and liability are separate from the owner's.
The Deed Hunter
Downfall
Formality: There are stricter requirements and more formalities
based on the state's law for an S Corp versus an LLC.
THEB ESTTY POE FB USINESTSR UCTUFROERY OU
SC orvps .L LC
The Similarities are:
• Both enable you to grow your business and take on new
owners;
• Both pass income to owners who report it on their personal
returns;
• Both have limited liability. This means that if the LLC incurs
debt or is sued, members' personal assets are usually exempt.
Here are some of the differences:
• On the LLC, the members are self-employed, whereas, the
shareholders of the S Corp are employees of their corporation,
meaning that the S Corp must pay Social Security and Medicare
to their employees, while the self-employed members of
the LLC themselves have to pay for the Social Security and
Medicare contributions.
• An S corp has an independent life: If a shareholder leaves the
company, or sells his or her shares, the S corp can continue
doing business relatively undisturbed, while the LLC has a
limited life. When a member leaves an LLC, the business is
dissolved and the members must fulfill all remaining legal and
business obligations to close the business.
• However, there is less record keeping required for an LLC.
• There is less registration paperwork.
Chapte6r : OperatinTgh rougah B usiness
• The S Corp also has stricter operational processes and composition
requirements dictated by the IRS, versus the LLC that
has fewer restrictions on profit sharing, so that the members
can distribute the profits as they see fit.
In Summary
• Operating through an LLC has more perks than through an
S Corp because of the fewer restrictions bestowed upon the
LLC versus the S Corp, and it is the best way to protect your
personal assets.
• It doesn't matter if you operate a single-member LLC or if it
has multiple owners, the LLC itself does not pay federal taxes.
Instead, you report all profits and losses of the LLC on your
personal income tax return, or each owner is taxed on their
share of the profits via their personal tax returns.
• LLC owners and members are self-employed and, therefore,
aren't subject to tax withholding, so each member must pay
estimated taxes and self-employment taxes (Medicare and
Social Security) quarterly to the IRS and their state tax office.
• An S corporation is required to allocate profits and losses
among the owners based strictly on the percentage of ownership.
In contrast, an LLC is able to allocate its profits and
losses in whatever proportions the owners desire.
TIPSF ORS ETTINUGPY OURB USINESS
Opening an LLC requires a little bit of paperwork. We have
provided you with the application for your new LLC and the SS-4
form for the EIN on the ''Additional References" tab.
Please keep in mind that the SS-4 form should only be signed by
you. Our accountant will fill out the rest of the information once
your LLC has been set up.
The Deed Hunter
TIP #1
The simpler, the better. When choosing a name for your LLC,
you are creating a name for you to work from. It does not have
to be a very different or creative name in order to have an impact
on people. Simply the fact that you operate from an entity versus
your name already shows that you are pretty serious about your
real estate business.
TIP #2
Choose different names. The LLC application form requires you
to put down two options of names for your business. We would
like to suggest that you make those names very distinct from one
another. The first name will be submitted to the State Secretary,
and, in case it is already taken, we will submit the second one for
approval.
If the two names are similar, for example, the first name option
is ABC-123 and gets denied, and your second option for an LLC
name is 123-ABC, most likely the second name will also get denied,
since the names are too similar to one another. This will delay the
approval for your LLC setup, and we would have to submit the
paperwork again with new, different names.
TIP#3
Don't pick a name that is too specific. Also, when picking a
name, we propose that you choose a generic name rather than a
specific one (for example, "ABC Tax Deed Investing"), and the
reason for that is when you pick a name that is too specific, you
limit the possibilities for what your business does. If you feel that
you might want to do other things using your LLC, a more generic
name will allow you to do that without hassles.
Chapte6r : OperatinTgh rougah B usiness
TIP#4
Anyone can open an LLC. Even if you don't have a social security
number, you can apply for an LLC. The process for filing the
application is a little different, but it does not take longer to process
the request than the regular application.
TIP#5
The necessary documents are:
• U.S. citizens: SSN, the application, and the signed SS-4 form;
• Non-U.S. citizens: copy of the passport LD. page, the application,
and the signed SS-4 form;
After we receive the approval and documentation back from
the Secretary of State, we will send all the documents to you (the
client), including the Articles of Corporation. Then, you should
take the LLC's paperwork to the bank of your choice to open a
business checking account. Now you are ready to buy/sell real estate
through your business.
For free bonuses with additional Tax Lien and Tax Deed information,
go to the following link: www.the24secret.com
CHAPTE7R:
Qualified
RetiremePntla n
Today, more than ever, small business owners realize the importance
of saving for the future. With the volatile stock market, unemployment
rate, declining value of the American dollar, the housing
market crisis, and the unstable state of social security, it is imperative
to invest your money wisely to secure your financial future.
The IRS code section allows special tax and non-tax benefits
that are only offered to small business owners. Through a Qualified
Retirement Plan, a small business owner can benefit from the
following:
• Huge tax savings;
• Asset protection from IRS, bankruptcy, and creditors;
• You are the trustee and in full control of your money;
• Contributions grow tax-deferred;
• Invest up to $50,000 tax-deferred;
• You can borrow from the plan;
• Hardship withdraws are allowed;
• Debt financing on real estate is allowed;
• Plus, many more benefits!
The Deed Hunter
A Qualified Retirement Plan is one of the best financial tools
used to save and protect your assets.
This plan allows for a variety of investment options that aren't
allowed in other retirement plans, such as a traditional IRA. You
are the trustee of the plan and eliminate third-party custodian fees
that can save you thousands!
One of the quickest ways to wealth is to minimize tax liability
and unnecessary fees, and the Qualified Retirement Plan solves
both of these issues.
INVESINT W HAYTO UK NOW
Pension Planners, LLC, strongly encourages others to invest in
what you know and potentially build wealth more effectively than
through a traditional retirement plan:
• If you are savvy with real estate, you can invest in real estate;
• If you know a company looking to raise capital, you can invest
in a note with that company;
• If you have experience in the mortgage industry, you can use
your QRP as a lender;
• If you have knowledge in Tax Lien and Tax Deed investing,
you can use your QRP to purchase these investments.
(See page 10 for investment options)
QUALIFIREEDT IREMEPNLAT NVS .I NDIVIDUAL
RETIREMEANCTC OUNTS
We are often told:
"I already have an IRA, and don't need anything else."
Once you compare the differences between a QRP, IRA, and
SEP IRA, you will be shocked to see all the benefits a QRP offers.
Chapte7r : QualifieRd etiremenPtl an
The chart beginning on page 80 notes the advantages of a QRP
over an IRA and a SEP IRA.
401(KA) NDP ROFIT-SHARFIENAGT URES
Within a Qualified Retirement Plan, a 40(k) and Profit-Sharing
accounts are both allowed.
This enables you to maximize the full $17,500 in elective deferral
as well as the remaining $33,500 in the profit-sharing plan for a
total of$51,000 in contributions for 2013.
ESTABLISHAIN QGR P
At American Tax Lien Association, we make adjustment up a
QRP simple.Just follow the basic steps below and call us if you
need help along the way.
The Deed Hunter
QRP IRA SEPIR A
Cannot
exceed the
The deductible
$5,500
leastof25%
contribution $51,000
of employees
limit for 2015
compensation
or$51,000;
NoERISA NoERISA
Protection
YES. ERISA protection. protection.
from creditors,
provided Limited Limited
bankruptcy, and
protection; bankruptcy bankruptcy
IRS
protection; protection;
Ability to
be your own
trustee, write/
YES Not allowed Not allowed
sing checks, and
directly control
your plan assets?
Can you borrow
YES. Permitted
from your
up to $50,000 or Not allowed Not allowed
retirement ½ vested account;
account?
Employee
contributions
$17,500 Not allowed Not allowed
(elective
deferral)
Catch up
contributions $5,500 $1,000 Not allowed
over age 50
Are
distributions
YES Not allowed Not allowed
allowed for
hardships?
Chapte7r : QualifieRd etiremenPtl an
QRP IRA SEPIR A
Pay
Leverage real Profits NOT
ordinary Pay ordinary
tax on all tax on all real
estate taxed;
real estate estate profits;
profits;
Ability to
purchase life YES Not allowed Not allowed
insurance?
Stockholder in
a subchapter YES Not allowed Not allowed
S-Corporation
Can invest
in many Many IRAs
Many IRAs
nontraditional do not
Alternative
investments, allow nondo
not allow
investments nontraditional
such as gold, Tax traditional
investments;
Deeds, real estate, investments;
Tax Liens, etc.;
Allowed up to
20% per year and
not 100% vested
until six years with Not allowed.
Vesting the employers NIA Employees are
requirements (employers 100%vested
can elect for immediately;
employees to
be 100% vested
immediately);
Roth after-tax
Allowed Allowed Not allowed
contributions
*Limits are subjects to change
The Deed Hunter
Adopt the QRP written documents. Contact American Tax
Lien Association, and we will prepare the plan documents.
• Establish a trust fund for the plan assets at any financial institution;
• If you have employees, provide the Summary Plan Description
and other plan information to employees;
• Determine your record-keeping system;
• Contribute to the plan, roll over funds from other retirement
accounts, and begin investing.
MANAGIANQ GR P
The steps involved in managing the plan are as follows:
Eligibility
If you have employees, you need to verify eligibility for participation
in the plan.
Typically, an employee qualifies to be in the plan once he/she has
worked 1,000 hours and is aged 21 or older. Participants may enter
the plan on January 1st or July 1st of the plan year. Therefore, if a
participant is hired on 3/1/13 and works more than 1,000 hours,
he/ she can enter the plan on 1/1/14.
Contributions
There are a few different types of contributions you can make
toaQRP.
Chapte7r : QualifieRd etiremenPtl an
Tradition4a0l1{ k)C ontributions
You can contribute up to $17,500 tax-deferred in a traditional
401(k). These are also known as elective deferrals, and there are
no compensation limitations. For example, if you make a salary
of $30,000, you can still invest the entire $17,500. If you have
employees, and they make elective deferral contributions, they are
100% vested.
Roth4 01{ k)C ontributions
You can contribute up to $17,500, after-tax dollars. The contributions
are made in a separate account from the traditional pre-tax
401(k). The contributions to both traditional and Roth 401(k)
accounts cannot exceed $17,500. If you have employees, and they
make elective deferral contributions, they are 100% vested.
Profit-SharCinogn tributions
One of the major benefits of the QRP, allowing for a Profit-Sharing
Plan in addition to the 401(k), is that you are not required to
invest money in either account.
Profit-sharing contribution limits are the losses of 20% to 25%
of compensation, or $51,000 for 2013. An LLC can contribute
20% of profits or guaranteed payments, and a Corporation can
contribute 25% ofW-2 wages.
If you have employees, each employee will be on a 6-year vesting
schedule, which means they are not 100% vested until they have
worked for the company for six years.
The Deed Hunter
FiduciaRrye sponsibilities
Trustees of a QRP have basic fiduciary responsibilities that
include:
• Following guidelines in the plan documents;
• Act in the interest of the participants to provide retirement
benefits;
• Informing employees of any changes in the plan, as well as
their rights and responsibilities in directing investments.
AnnuFali linRg equirements
Qualified Retirement Plans are required to file Form 5 500 to the
IRS and Department of Labor if they meet one of the following
requirements:
• The company has employees;
OR
• The plan has $250,000 or more in assets.
American Tax Lien Association has a third-party administrator
and can file Form 5500 for your QRP. Contact us for more
information.
For free bonuses with additional Tax Lien and Tax Deed information,
go to the following link: www.the24secret.com
CHAPTE8R:
InvestoMr indset
WHAYTO UN EETDO G ETS TARTED
Considering what you have seen so far, you might be wondering:
how do I start?
There are some important details that you need to know:
1. You need a list of the states that sell Tax Deeds (if you want
to invest in TD) or Tax Lien Certificates;
2. Information about the interest rate in each state, as well as
the redemption period (if any);
3. How to access the auctions;
4. Learn how to identify the best properties according to your
goals.
Before starting, you need to consider the following questions.
Consider these five questions before anything else:
The Deed Hunter
1. Which strategy is right for you?
2. Where should you focus your efforts when investing?
3. How much money do you have available to invest?
4. How long could you wait for a return on investment? Short,
medium, or long-term?
5. How much time per week would you have to make this strategy
work for you?
It is very important that you give yourself a chance to succeed.
Go to the linkwww.the24secret.com, where you can find videos
that discuss each of the five mentioned questions.
The videos also talk about limitations and objectives so that you
can make an educated decision.
But, before starting the video, please print the free bonus planning
template to start designing your investment strategy.
Whicsht rategisyt her ighot nefo ry ou?
Tax Deeds or Tax Lien Certificates? Which one is the best?
There is no "best" in this case.
When you invest in Tax Lien Certificates, you have the opportunity
to benefit from profits through interest and penalties paid
by the owner, with the possibility of becoming a property owner.
When you invest in Tax Deeds, you will work towards ownership
and decide what to do: sell or rent the property.
The two investment strategies are interesting and attractive for
different reasons. Each investor has his/her preferences.
However, we suggest you choose one of them so that you will
specialize in one strategy before learning the other.
Following the video in the link www.the24secret.com, you will
find a questionnaire. Your answers will help you determine what
your strategy should be.
The shaded areas show which strategy is best for that particular
matter.
Chapte8r : InvestoMr indset
Wherseh ouyldo up uty ouer fforts?
To answer this question, you can count on an excellent tool:
the internet.
It is very helpful to know the county in which you intend to
invest. You should start with the states and counties that you are
most familiar with, places where you have relatives, or know someone
who lives there. Start making a list of those counties.
However, if you have no idea or any reference to start with, we
recommend you to start with the state with the shortest redemption
period or the state with the highest interest rate.
After choosing the state, you must select the counties. Using
any search engine ( Google, Bing, etc.), you may search for the best
county in that state. Select the three top counties.
Every county has good and not-so-good neighborhoods. You
can check the quality of schools by going to the link http:/ /www.
greatschools.org/. The quality of schools is usually a good tool to
determine the best neighborhoods.
Howm ucmh onedyo y ouh avteo i nvest?
Some people want to invest all their capital, putting it to work
immediately. On the other hand, others prefer to start slowly.
There are so many TLCs/TDs available that it would be very
easy for you to invest a small fortune in a very short period of time.
If you decide to invest in Tax Lien Certificates, I encourage you
to invest a portion of your capital every month. It may be a good
idea to divide your capital into 12 parts (or set an amount to be
invested monthly).
Let's say you have $60,000 total. You could invest $5,000 per
month. By doing so, you will have a constant return, since TLC
will be redeemed almost always.
If you decide to invest in Tax Deeds, it is a completely different
picture. You may invest all your capital in one, two, or as many
The Deed Hunter
properties you have selected in your due diligence ( we will cover
how to find the right properties another time). Remember: when
you buy TD, you are actually buying the property.
You don't need to have $5,000 to start investing. There is a wide
variety of TLC and TD, ranging from $30 up to $3,000,000!
However, a good reason to stipulate how much to invest is for
you to control your finances. Please, don't go shopping without a
stipulated amount. We are always tempted to buy more than we
should.
Howm ucahr ey ouw illintgo i nvest?
What amount do you think is appropriate to invest in your first
transaction?
Howlo ngc any oue xpectot g etr esults?
Part of your investment plan is to determine how long you can
wait to get results.
You need to have in mind that some states might have higher
interest rates, but the redemption period may be three years. So,
ask yourself: Can I afford to tie up this capital for up to three
years? If your answer is "Yes", then it will become an advantage for
you, because there are only a few investors looking for long-term
investments.
Determine which redemption period to work with. Once you've
decided what your preference is, follow your investment plan. Keep
focused on the established limits you have set.
Howm ucthim ed oy ouh avep erw eek?
Normal activities can disrupt your initial objective, so it is
important to decide how much time to invest in this business.
Chapte8r : InvestoMr indset
Consistency is the keyword here. No matter how much time you
can devote to your investment activities, you should make it part
of your routine. You have to block that period in your schedule.
For free bonuses with additional Tax Lien and Tax Deed information,
go to the following link: www.THEDEEDHUNTERWORLD.COM
CHAPTE9R:
Whatto Expect
inE achS tate
Depending on how much time and capital you have for this new
business, also on your objectives as an investor, certain states and
or counties will work better for your strategy.
Below is a list stating the main characteristics and information
for each state. Please, use it to help you choose where to start
investing.
ALASKA
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: Up to 1 year
Auction Type: Varies
Number of Counties: 27
Telephone: (907) 586-1325
Website: www.akml.org
The Deed Hunter
ARIZONA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 16% per annum
Redemption Period: 3 years
Auction Type: Bid down interest
Number of Counties: 15
Telephone: (602) 252-6563
Website: www.azcounties.org
CALIFORNIA
Category: Tax Deed
Rate of Interest: 18% per annum
Redemption Period: Up to 2 years
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 58
Telephone: (916) 445-2636
Website: Website: www.sco.ca.gov
COLORADO
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: Variable
Redemption Period: 3 years
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 63
Telephone: (303) 861-4076
Website: https://ccionline.org/
Chapte9r : What o Expecitn EachS tate
CONNECTICUT
Category: Redeemable Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: 18% yearly
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 8
Telephone: (203) 498-3000
Website: www.ccm-ct.org
DELAWARE
Category: Tax Deed
Rate of Interest: 1 S%
Redemption Period: 60 days
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 3
Telephones:
Kent: (302) 744-2300
New Castle: (302) 39S-SSSS
Sussex: (302) 85S-7741
Websites:
Kent: www.co.kent.de.us
New Castle: www2.nccde.org
Sussex: www.sussexcountyde.gov
The Deed Hunter
DISTRIOCTFC OLUMBIA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 12% per annum
Redemption Period: 6 months
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 8
Telephone: (202) 727-6304
Website: www.dc.gov
FLORIDA
Category: Liens & Deeds
Rate of Interest: 18%
Redemption Period: 2 years
Auction Type: Bid down interest
Number of Counties: 67
Telephone: (850) 922-4300
Website: www.fl-counties.com
GEORGIA
Category: Redeemable Deed
Rate of Interest: 10% to 20%
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 159
Telephone: (404) 522-5022
Website: www.accg.org
Chapte9r : What o Expecitn EachS tate
HAWAII
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 12% per annum
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 5
Telephone: (808) 547-7001
Website: www.portal.ehawaii.gov
IDAHO
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 44
Telephone: (208) 345-9126
Website: www.idcounties.org
ILLINO/S
Category: Liens & Deeds
Rate oflnterest: 18% to 24%
Redemption Period: 2-3 years
Auction Type: Bid down interest
Number of Counties: 102
Telephone: (217) 782-3336
Website: www.revenue.state.il.us
The Deed Hunter
IND/ANA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 10% to 15%
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 92
Telephone: (317) 684-3710
Website: www.indianacounties.org
IDWA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 24% per annum
Redemption Period: 1 year and 9 months
Auction Type: Bid down interest
Number of Counties: 99
Telephone: (515) 244-7181
Website: www.iowacounties.org
KANSAS
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 105
Telephone: (785) 272-2585
Website: www.kansascounties.org
Chapte9r : What o Expecitn EachS tate
KENTUCKY
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 12% per annum
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 120
Telephone: (502) 223-7667
Website: www.kaco.org
LOUS/ANA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 12% + 5% penalty
Redemption Period: 5 years
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 64
Telephone: (225) 344-5001
Website: www.lma.org
MAINE
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Sealed
Number of Counties: 16
Telephone: (207) 624-5600
Website: www.maine.gov
The Deed Hunter
MARYLAND
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 6% to 24%
Redemption Period: 6 months
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 23
Telephone: (410) 269-0043
Website: www.mdcounties.org
MASSACHUSETTS
Category: Tax Deed
Rate of Interest: 16% per annum
Redemption Period: 6 months
Auction Type: Bid down ownership
Number of Counties: 14
Telephone: (617) 426-7272
Website: www.mma.org
MICHIGAN
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: 15%
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 83
Telephone: (800) 258-1152
Website: www.micounties.org
Chapte9r : What o Expecitn EachS tate
MINNESOTA
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 87
Telephone: (651) 224-3344
Website: www.mncounties.org
MISSISSIPPI
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 12% per annum+ 5% penalty
Redemption Period: 2 years
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 82
Telephone: (601) 359-1350
Website: www.ms.gov/content/Pages/Local-Governments.aspx
MISSOURI
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 10% per annum+ 8% subsequent taxes
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 114
Telephone: (573) 634-2120
Website: www.mocounties.com
The Deed Hunter
MONTANA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 10%
Redemption Period: 2 to 3 years
Auction Type: Random or rotational
Number of Counties: 57
Telephone: ( 406) 449-4360
Website: www.mtcounties.org
NEBRASKA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 14% per annum
Redemption Period: 3 years
Auction Type: Bid down ownership
Number of Counties: 93
Telephone: ( 402) 434-5660
Website: www.nacone.org
NEVADA
Category: Liens & Deeds
Rate oflnterest: 12%
Redemption Period: 120 days to 2 years
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 17
Telephone: (775) 883-7863
Website: www.nvnaco.org
Chapte9r : What o Expecitn EachS tate
NEWH AMPSHIRE
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 18%
Redemption Period: 2 years
Auction Type: Bid down ownership
Number of Counties: 10
Telephone: (603) 224-9222
Website: www.nhcounties.org
NEWJE RSEY
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 18%
Redemption Period: 2 years
Auction Type: Bid down interest
Number of Counties: 21
Telephone: (609) 394-3467
Website: www.njac.org
NEWM EXICO
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 33
Telephone: (505) 983-2101
Website: www.nmcounties.org
The Deed Hunter
NEWY ORK
Category: Lies & Deeds
Rate of Interest: Lies & Deeds
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 62
Telephone: (518) 465-1473
Website: www.nysac.org
NORTCHA ROLINA
Category: Tax Deed
Rate of Interest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 100
Telephone: (919) 715-2893
Website: www.ncacc.org
NORTDHA KOTA
Category: Tax Deed
Rate of Interest: 9% to 12% per annum
Redemption Period: 4 years
Auction Type: Bid down interest
Number of Counties: 53
Telephone: (701) 328-7300
Website: www.ndaco.org
Chapte9r : What o Expecitn EachS tate
OHIO
Category: Liens & Deeds
Rate of Interest: 18% per annum
Redemption Period: 1 year (TLC) 11S days (TD)
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 88
Telephone: (614) 431-SS00
Website: www.buckeyesheriffs.org
OKLAHOMA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 8% per annum
Redemption Period: 2 years
Auction Type: Random or rational
Number of Counties: 77
Telephone: (800) 982-6212
Website: www.okacco.com
OREGON
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 36
Telephone: (S03) S8S-83S1
Website: www.oregoncounties.org
The Deed Hunter
PENNSYLVANIA
Category: Liens & Deeds
Rate oflnterest: 10% per annum
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 67
Telephone: (717) 232-7554
Website: www.pacounties.org
RHODISEL AND
Category: Tax Deed
Rate of Interest: 10%+
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Bid down interest or Premium
Number of Counties: 5
Telephone: (401) 222-2397
Website: www.treasury.ri.gov
SOUTCHA ROLINA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 8% to 12% per annum
Redemption Period: 1 year to 18 months
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 46
Telephone: (803) 252-7255
Website: www.sccounties.org
Chapte9r : What o Expecitn EachS tate
SOUTDHA KOTA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 12% per annum
Redemption Period: 3 to 4 years
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 66
Telephone: (605) 224-4554
Website: www.sdcounties.org
TENNESSEE
Category: Tax Deed
Rate of Interest: 10% per annum
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 95
Telephone: (615) 532-3767
Website: www.tncounties.org
TEXAS
Category: Redeemable Deed
Rate of Interest: 25%
Redemption Period: 6 months or 2 years
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 254
Telephone: (512) 478-8753
Website: www.county.org
The Deed Hunter
UTAH
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 29
Telephone: (801) 265-1331
Website: www.uacnet.org
VERMONT
Category: Tax Lien
Rate of Interest: 12% per annum
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 14
Telephone: (802) 229-9111
Website: www.vlct.org
VIRGINIA
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 95
Telephone: (804) 788-6652
Website: www.vaco.org
Chapte9r : What o Expecitn EachS tate
WASHINGTON
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: NIA
Redemption Period: NIA
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 39
Telephone: (360) 753-1886
Website: www.wsac.org
WESVTI RGINIA
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 12%
Redemption Period: 1 year
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 55
Telephone: (304) 346-0591
Website: www.wvaco.org
WISCONSIN
Category: Tax Deed
Rate oflnterest: 18%
Redemption Period: 2 years
Auction Type: Premium
Number of Counties: 72
Telephone: (608) 663-7188
Website: www.wicounties.org
The Deed Hunter
WYOMING
Category: Tax Lien
Rate oflnterest: 15% + 3% penalty
Redemption Period: 4 years
Auction Type: Bid down ownership
Number of Counties: 23
Telephone: (307) 632-5409
Website: www.wyo-wcca.org
To obtain access to a county directory, please go to the following
link: WWW.THEDEEDHUNTERWORLD.COM
Aboutth eA uthor
Marcos is a Brazilian immigrant who
went from driving a truck for 14 years
to a millionaire in just 4 years by applying
the two most profitable and least
known investment strategies that exist
in the U.S.
After migrating to the U.S. in 1998 with
just $100 in his pocket, and after driving a
truck for a long time, he went from zero to hero after discovering
Tax Liens and Tax Deeds. Through Tax Liens and Tax Deeds, he
was able to finalize hundreds of deals, including purchasing properties
for as low as $31. His best deal so far was paying $6,342 for
a property worth $1.5 million dollars.
Father of two beautiful children, Marcos is an author, investor,
international speaker, and teacher who has helped thousands of
individuals in different countries to start their real estate investment
careers in the U.S.
ISBN: 978-1547248018
I 11 11 9 781547