1 tax office
STEP #01 - DEED HUNTER METHOD

AHO, HUNTER!

Welcome to the first step of the Deed Hunter Method, this is where your hunt to buy your first property really begins!

The first step of the Deed Hunter Method is the Tax Office.

Here you'll find the main item to start this business, which are the property listings.

The Tax Office is responsible for collecting property taxes in several states and may vary in name depending on the state.

To find out if you're looking in the right place, make sure it's the one responsible for collecting taxes.

In some states, this information will be at the Township level and not at the county level. Once you've found that department, you'll not only be able to find the list, but you'll also find all the information about the auction.

Such as rules, dates, whether the county has Struck-off or not, whether they work with Over-The-Counter or not and whether the county is represented by a law firm.

You will use this site on two different occasions:


At first, to find the list, and then to check if the property has outstanding taxes or taxes from previous years.

The Tax Office will be your portal to dozens of pieces of information within that county.

So, if you need any reference to property taxes, this is the department. If you can't get this information online, call the county.

In addition to all this, some states create a separate and distinct department from the Tax Office to deal with property inventory.

We say separate, but sometimes it's just an extension of these departments that are called Land Banks.

The purpose of a Land Bank is to facilitate the acquisition of abandoned properties, properties with tax debt, with the intention of returning these properties to a productive use.

Now that you've understood and learned all the theory, it's time to learn how to take that first step in practice.

Let's go!
You will Google "the name of the county + "Tax

Office".



You can also Google:
"What entity takes care of property taxes in Waka Waka

County".

Example: Searching for the Tax Office in the State of Mississippi.

1- [name of county] + county + state +
tax office or tax forfeited land + [name of state]


2- Find the website.

3- Find the rules.


4- Time to find the lists.

- After reading the rules, I went back to Public lands and clicked on Tax- Forfeited inventory.

Translated with www.DeepL.com/Translator (free version)