4 flood zone
STEP #04 - DEED HUNTER METHOD

AHO, HUNTER!

Welcome to the fourth step of the Deed Hunter Method! The fourth step of the Deed Hunter Method is the Flood Zone.

What you see next is very important. Many, many people have lost a lot of money by failing to observe this next step.

But you don't have to worry about that if it happens to you. Remember that you are a smart and well-informed investor. Check out Flood Zone.

How does the Flood Zone work? How is it determined? Who is responsible for it?

So, the office in charge is FEMA (Federal Emergency Management Agency). This institution has many roles, one of which is to map flood areas. Every square meter of the United States has been mapped, and based on previous data has been assigned to specific flood zones.

The map is really complete and is broken down by years:

● FZ - 500 years: means that these properties can flood every 500 years.

 FZ - 100 years: This means that these properties could flood every 100 years.

FZ - 30 years: This means that these properties can flood every 30 years.

FloodWay: Area that is always flooded.

However, buying a Flood Zone property is not a bad thing. It does mean that, most of the time, the property will have to have an extra insurance policy called flood insurance. And as the number gets lower, 500, 100, 30, the greater the chance of that property being flooded, and the higher the price of the policy.

One more detail to pay attention to when it comes to selling the property is the fact that some buyers avoid and will avoid buying properties that are in a 30-year flood zone. It's not impossible, but it will probably be a little difficult to get rid of.

So the big thing to avoid is FloodWay. You'll probably never get a permit to build anything on the property in FloodWay.

Where to check the Flood Zone map?

On the fema.gov website, but in some cases, you can also find this information at the Appraisal District, yes, the one from step two. Or if you can't find it that way, you can also search for it on Google: County name + Flood Map Viewer.

EXAMPLE: Finding out if the property is in a Floodzone area in Mississippi.

1- On Google, I search for Flood Factor or [county name] + county + flood map. Both will have information about the property's Flood Zone.

2 - On Flood Factor, I searched for the property in the search bar using the address.

3 - The site will tell you the scale according to the property's location and Flood Zone level.

This will ensure that you are in a safe property. Do not, under any circumstances, buy properties that are in a Flood Way area. For safety reasons, they cannot be modified.