AUDITOR McCUSKEY, SENATOR WELD CELEBRATE BILL TO BAN CHINA, RUSSIA, OTHER COUNTRIES FROM PROPERTY TAX SALE
West Virginia State Auditor JB McCuskey and Senator Ryan Weld are celebrating the signing into law of SB 548, which will further improve the State Auditor’s property tax sale process, clean up slum and blight in our communities, and ensure countries that wish to do America harm are banned from buying tax sale properties and mineral interests in West Virginia.
Our land is a prime target by bad foreign actors, which has become a growing threat. According to data from the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Chinese ownership of United States farmland went from $81 million in 2010 to $1.8 billion in 2020.With SB 548, West Virginia becomes the first state in the nation to ban nations designated as a “country of particular concern” by the U.S. State
Department from buying real estate through the West Virginia property tax sale. The move is
to ensure mineral interests, farmland, and other real estate isn’t bought by individuals or entities acting on behalf of countries such as the People’s Republic of China, Russia, Saudi Arabia, North Korea, and others.
“With this bill, West Virginia is leading the nation to protect our farmlands and mineral interests,” Auditor JB McCuskey said. “The governments of China, Russia, Saudi Arabia and others have proven themselves to be enemies of American prosperity, and this bill is a proactive step to ensure we have control of our energy and food supply chains.”
“Each year mineral interests and former mining sites that are potential sources for rare earth elements are sold through the delinquent tax sale process. SB 548 will ensure that these types of properties are not purchased by foreign nations hostile to the U.S.,” said Senator Weld, lead sponsor of the bill.
Additionally, SB 548 creates a bidder registry. After speaking with leaders in communities throughout the state, it became apparent that for decades delinquent tax sales have been contributing to slum and blight all over West Virginia. The registry will help address this problem by ensuring those who have neglected properties and who created dangerous situations in one
community aren’t able to do the same in another community. Bidders at the property tax sale will not be able to bid if they have failed to make a payment owed at a prior auction, are delinquent in the payment of property taxes, have a history of noncompliance with building code enforcement, or have failed to comply with a valid raze or repair order. Also, LLCs wishing to bid must now be registered with the West Virginia Secretary of State’s office.